Digital Scholarship Summer Fellowship 2017 Program Schedule 

Overview

Four weeks set aside as an introduction to Digital Scholarship, three weeks dedicated to project management and development -- 20 hrs. per week -- 4 days/wk, 5 hrs/day (9am – 12pm, 1-3pm) -- afternoon sessions for hands on activities/modules, Thursdays dedicated to experiential learning. 


Program Goals:
Train students in digital scholarship skills such as digital mapping, programming, data cleaning, and project management. 
Help students apply digital competencies by working on a local digital scholarship project
Introduce students to potential digital scholarship and related career paths
Help students to consider and build a professional online identity through Digital Bryn Mawr
(internal) Develop a cohort of students with DS skills who can help support faculty/staff/student projects during the school year
(internal) Identify challenges and opportunities of Digital Bryn Mawr for undergraduates

Visitors
Juliana Perry, Web Services (Physical Computing and Web Development)
Zoe Seiden (Girls who Code) - Wed. June 14th. 
Camilla MacKay (Open Access & Copyright)
Olivia Castello (Data)
Evan McGonagill (College Women)
Christiana Dobrzynski (Special Collections)

Trips / Experiential Learning on Thursdays
Wed. June 14th: Special Collections / College Archives / College Women (contacts: Evan McGonagill, Christiana Dobrzynski)
Thur. June 15th: Next Fab (makerspace, recommended by Camilla)
Thur. June 22nd: Hosting local meetup of DS students 
Thur. June 29th: Interactive Mechanics 
Thur. July 13th: Keystone DH Conference (Chemical Heritage Foundation in Philly)
Week of July 24th:  OSIsoft (developer of PI System for Data Vis.)



Schedule

Week 1 (June 12 – 16): Introduction to Digital Scholarship & Data Management
Monday, June 12: Introductions
AM
Intro to program, schedule, expectations, tour of DMCL
What is DS? Definitions, difficulties, differences, etc.
Overview of DS Projects
Text Analysis
Data Vis.
Network Analysis
Spatial Analysis (3D Modeling & Mapping)
Digital Exhibitions
Framework for assessing and critiquing DS projects
PM
Get set up with Google Docs
Digital Competencies self-assessment
LILAC: Define Learning Contract (i.e. personal learning objectives)
Domain of One’s Own
FLOGS (failure logs)
 
Tuesday, June 13: Web Development
AM
Intro to HTML / CSS
Behind your web browser
Writing a basic HTML page
Domain of One’s Own 
Public HTML folders / Application structures (where to install plugins/themes/etc)
PM
Activity: Build a biographical website with linked pages & images
Time for FLOGging?
 
Wednesday, June 14: Data Management
AM
Quick demo of data viz
Anatomy of Information (Olivia visits) 9:30-10:15
What is data and how can we work with it?
Data formats (csv, json, txt, etc.)
Collecting data 
Data Management module (Rachel)
PM
Discussion & Reflection on DM Module 
Careers in Web Design or Web Development (Zoe Seiden) 1:30-2:30pm (until 3:00 if going well)
 
Thursday, June 15: Physical Computing
AM
Anatomy of Technology
Opening the computer’s “black box”
Physical Computing activity (Alicia)
PM
Meet at Bryn Mawr Station  at 12:40pm (train to Suburban Station, 17 Bus from 17 & JFK)
2pm tour @ NextFab (2025 Washington Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19146)
 
For Week Two: Return to the College Women’s Project to determine what forms of data it provides for digital scholarship.
 
 
Week 2 (June 19 – 23): Introduction to Spatial Analysis & Creating Accessible DS Projects
Monday, June 19: Web Dev
AM
Team Check-in: Week 1 Reflections (30-60 min)
Flogging
Data Module Completion
PM
Introduction to Special Collections & the College Women’s Project (Christiana & Evan)
 
Tuesday, June 20: Web Dev
AM
ADOOO
Installing WordPress
PM
Goal: get websites live on web
Wednesday, June 21: Accessibility

AM
Audience Inclusion, Access, Participation
Defining the target group
How engagement occurs – what is the audience interface?

PM
Intro to tools of access
Wave (http://wave.webaim.org/)
George Williams (1:30-3:00 PM) Guest speaker on creating digital access for diverse abilities 
Joined by ETS interns

Thursday, June 22: Community of Scholarship
Undergraduates in Digital Scholarship Meetup @ Bryn Mawr.  10am – 3pm
Faculty & Staff DS project presentations and sharing
Undergraduate sharing & problem solving
Rooms:  Dalton 300
 
For Week Three: Brainstorm how the various DS methods explored this week could be applied to the College Women’s Project
 
Week 3 (June 26 – 30): Data Visualization, Design & Publishing DS Projects
 Monday, June 26: HTML/CSS Review
AM
Team Check-in: Week 2 Reflections
LILAC Orientation with Katie (9:30am - 12:00pm)
PM
Return to HTML/CSS & professional websites
Accessibility check?

Tuesday, June 27: Data Visualization Part I - Basics
AM
Looking at some data visualization examples both inside and outside of academy
Choosing the best digital tools for Data Visualization
Raw
D3
Tableau
PM
What a dataset looks like for Data Visualization
 Data Viz Module (Alicia)


Wednesday, June 28: Data Visualization Part II - Design

AM
Review & Questions of Data Visualization Part I
What makes “good” data visualization?
Research question
Audience needs
Final publication format: print, electronic
Design & Media
Intro to web & user design
What is the final product and how is it distributed?
PM
Design Module (Nathanael) 

 
Thursday, June 29: Drafting Project Goals & Field Trip
AM
What makes a good research question in Digital Scholarship?
Project planning (deciding on research question, etc.)
PM
Field Trip: Interactive Mechanics (to arrive around 1:30, regional rail from Bryn Mawr @ 12:47pm to Jefferson, MFL to 2nd st.)
 
For Week Four: Come up with a list of questions and projects that could be applied to the College Women Project
 
 
Week 4 (July 3 – 7): Self-Study & Building a College Women Dataset 
Students may opt to self study pre-approved technologies during this time to receive their hours (e.g. to practice with data visualization tools)
Students will begin creating a dataset for the CW project

Thursday, July 6: User Testing Workshop at Haverford

 
Week 5  (July 10 – 14): Project Management and Preparation
Monday, July 10: Project Management Part I - Planning
NOTE: Alicia will be organizing Keystone DH July 12-14

AM
Team Check-in: Review of Digital Scholarship Methods and Tools
Remaining questions & issues
Project Management basics ( Juliana Perry visits)
PM
Project Management for College Women data viz project
Goal Setting / Project charters
Timeline
Personnel/Resource management
Develop schedule for following four weeks (build in an accessibility check?)
 

Tuesday, July 11: Project Management Part II - Workshop & Review; Sharing & Publishing Digital Scholarship Projects
AM
Review of goals & charters
Review of Timeline & Management
Some Questions: How will the project as planned currently fit in or engage with existing College Women’s content? ….
LILAC: Mid-Summer Reflection (Reflect on summer experience by answering several questions about your learning and personal growth)
PM
Copyright, Creative Commons, Open Access, Provenance, Privacy, & Terms of Service
Legal-ese of the tools we use, and why we use them
Common terminology (free, open-source, freemium…)
Camilla guest visits

Wednesday, July 12: FLEX DAY

FLEX DAY am
Keystone DH trip (~2-late pm)


Thursday, July 13: Trip to Keystone DH Conference @ Chemical Heritage Foundation

Conference ~9am-5pm


 Week 6 (July 17 – 21)
Monday, July 17:
LILAC Orientation with Katie (9:30am - 12:00pm)


Project Time
Team check-in
Trip to Haverford DS
 

Week 7(July 24 – 28)
SketchUp Module (Elena) 
Carto Module (Andrew)
Project Time
Team check-in
Trip to OSIsoft
prototype feedback from LITS folks?
LILAC Communications Blog Post
 

Week 8 (July 31 – August 4)
Project Time
Wrap up & Reflections on Digital Competencies gained
Presentation to LITS staff
LILAC Presentation? (confirm date)
Finishing Touches
LILAC Final Evaluations (Student & Supervisor) & Reflection Paper (Final Deadline August 21)


Fall Semester Follow-Up:
LILAC @ Bryn Mawr and Beyond, Fri. Nov. 1st (Family Weekend): Create a presentation of 4 PowerPoint slides that will be printed. Slides address what you did, what you learned, and what you gained from the experience.  Prepare a 2-3 minute oral pitch.  Attend and share your experiences.

